<!-- Page 1: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Neuroeconomics
How our brain decides

---

<!-- Page 2: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Summary
• Low level decisions: Perceptual and Motion Decisions
• Model that describe these processes (diffusion)
• Brain regions that codify these processes
• High level decision making processes based on:
• Utility
• Probability
• Emotion

---

<!-- Page 3: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Conceptual map
History
TMS
Lesions 
Electrical stimulation
fMRI
EEG and 
MEG
Single-cell recordings
•
Lack of rationality
•
We are social animals
METHODS of neuroeconomic 
and decision making
Allais Paradox
Asian Disease
Study DECISION MAKING using psychology 
and neuroscience:
Low level decisions: Perceptual 
Decisions and Motion Decisions
High level decisions
1) Options
2) Not random decisions
3) Goal-directed
Probability
Orbitofrontal cortex →options
Ventrolateral cortex →selfcontrol
DLPFC →planning and organization
aCC →learning consequences
Inferior parietal lobe
Value/Utility
Emotions
Memory 
Lateral intraparietal area

---

<!-- Page 4: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Decisions start from sensory elaboration
We need to collect and elaborate information of 
sensory inputs →estimate of alternatives →
make decision
DECISION MAKING
Neuroeconomics is trying to 
understand how sensory information are 
transformed into decisions.

---

<!-- Page 5: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

How sensory information is transformed into 
decisions? 
Neural activity is the basic of our decision →We need to 
study our neuron’s activity →we can record FIRING RATE, 
that can indicate a specific process of decision making
DECISION MAKING

---

<!-- Page 6: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

FIRING RATE
• The inferior part of the parietal lobe (IPL) is 
known to play a very important role in 
sensorimotor integration. 
• Neurons in this region code goal-related motor 
acts performed with the mouth, with the hand and 
with the arm. 
• It has been demonstrated that most IPL motor 
neurons coding a specific motor act (e.g., 
grasping) show markedly different activation 
patterns according to the final goal of the action 
sequence in which the act is embedded (grasping 
for eating or grasping for placing).

---

<!-- Page 7: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

FIRING RATE
•
Each line represents 
a trial. 
•
We have 4 different 
neurons
•
We see groups of 
spikes at certain 
time points 
Figure 4. Time course of the activity of 4 neurons recorded 
in IPL. Each one codes a specific motor act, but is active 
only when the monkey executes the ‘‘grasping to eat’’ 
sequence. Both rasters and histograms are aligned with 
the moment in which the monkey touches the object. 
Beneath the histograms a schematic representation of the 
corresponding neuronal chain is shown.

---

<!-- Page 8: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Decisions
???
???
???
Different decisions
???
We need to find simple decisions in 
order to study the neurobiology of 
decision making

---

<!-- Page 9: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Decisions
• Cognitive neuroscience has made great progress regarding the neural 
basis of perceptual and motion decision making.
• Models of decision making, based largely on single cell firing in 
monkeys, assumes that neurons encode a sequential probability ratio 
test (SPRT) (Barnard, 1946, Good, 1979, Wald, 1947).

---

<!-- Page 10: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Example of simple decisions: Perceptual 
decisions
• Perceptual decision making is the process by which sensory 
information is used to guide behavior toward the external world. 
This involves gathering information through the senses, evaluating
and integrating information according to the current goals and 
internal state of the subject, and using information to produce motor 
responses
• The aim of the decision-maker is to categorize ambiguous (or noisy) 
sensory information

---

<!-- Page 11: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual decisions

---

<!-- Page 12: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual decisions
hidden Dalmatian

---

<!-- Page 13: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual decisions

---

<!-- Page 14: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual decisions
hidden Elephant

---

<!-- Page 15: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Motion perception

---

<!-- Page 16: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual decisions and motion
• Our brain is very sensitive to perceptual decisions and motion, and 
there are specialized neurons that code these decisions.

---

<!-- Page 17: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual 
discrimination task
•
Authors have measured the 
performance of monkeys and of visual 
cortical neurons while the animals 
performed a psychophysical task well 
matched to the properties of the 
neurons under study.
•
Animals were trained to report the 
direction of motion of dots presented 
on a screen. 
•
Some dots moved coherently while the 
others moved at random.

---

<!-- Page 18: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual 
discrimination task
The monkey has to switch gaze right or left, following the movement direction of the 
majority of the dots presented on the screen.
• If the majority of dots are moving right →animal has to switch gaze right. 
• If the majority of dots are moving left →animal has to switch gaze left.

---

<!-- Page 19: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual 
discrimination task
•
It is possible to manipulate the percentage of dots moving in a direction →we can increase the 
difficulty of the task.
•
In the 0% motion coherence →dots are moving in random order →Monkey couldn't make it as it is a 
very difficult perceptual decision task

---

<!-- Page 20: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

100 % Coherence example

---

<!-- Page 21: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

30 % Coherence example

---

<!-- Page 22: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

0 % Coherence example

---

<!-- Page 23: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual 
discrimination task
•
Motion information projects to the retina
•
Information reaches the visual cortex in 
which there are “motion detectors”, neurons 
that are sensitive to motion (Left and Right)
• The activity of these neurons is proportional 
to the amount of motion on the screen.
• A network of neurons compares Left vs Right
• Than we have the decision.

---

<!-- Page 24: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual 
discrimination task
•
The authors recorded single neuron activity 
from area MT, mediotemporal, (V5), a region of 
the extrastriate visual cortex concerned with 
motion processing, where most neurons 
respond optimally to visual stimuli of a 
particular direction and speed of motion.
•
At low correlation, the monkey chose the 
correct direction only on about half the trials 
(random performance)
•
At high correlation, monkey’s performance was 
nearly perfect
•
The network of neurons decides for “black”
•
The network decides by random choice 
Low correlation
High correlation

---

<!-- Page 25: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Stimulation of LIP →affects this decision 
• Aim of the study: Recent physiological studies suggest that neurons in 
association areas may be involved in decision-making process. To test 
this, the authors measured the effects of electrical microstimulation
in the lateral intraparietal area (LIP) while monkeys performed a 
reaction-time motion discrimination task with a saccadic response.

---

<!-- Page 26: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Stimulation of LIP →affects this decision 
• When monkeys indicate decisions about direction of 
motion with an eye movement, LIP neurons increase 
or decrease their firing as evidence accumulates in 
favor of or against the choice associated with the 
target in their response field (RF)
• Neurons in LIP appear to represent the mounting 
evidence for or against an eye movement to the 
choice target in their RF

---

<!-- Page 27: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Stimulation of LIP →affects this decision 
Monkeys were trained to perform a two choice direction 
discrimination task while viewing a random-dot motion stimulus
Fig. 1. Experimental Design. A recording/stimulating 
microelectrode was advanced into the ventral portion of area 
LIP to identify a cluster of neurons with response fields (RFs) 
and sustained activity during memory-guided saccades. 
The monkey performed a direction discrimination task with 
several levels of task difficulty randomly interleaved. The 
monkey could respond at any time after onset of the random 
dot motion and it indicated its decision with a saccadic eye 
movement. One of the two choice targets was placed in the RF 
of the LIP neurons. We applied microstimulation as shown 
from the onset of the motion stimulus until the initiation of 
the saccade on a random half of the trials.

---

<!-- Page 28: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Microstimulation of this lateral 
intraparietal area cluster caused 
an increase in the proportion of 
choices to the response field of the 
stimulated neurons. 
Choices toward the stimulated RF 
were faster with microstimulation, 
while choices in the opposite 
direction were slower. 
Fig. 2.
Microstimulation in LIP affects both decisions and reaction times. (a, b) Effect of motion
strength and LIP microstimulation on monkeys’ choices. The probability of a Tin choice is
plotted as a function of motion strength. Positive and negative motion strengths correspond 
to motion toward Tin and Tout, respectively. The sigmoid curves are fit using equation 1, 
which characterizes the microstimulation effect as a horizontal shift of the psychometric 
function. (c, d) Effect of motion strength and LIP microstimulation on reaction time. 
Average RTs (± SEM) are plotted as a function of motion strength for all correct trials.

---

<!-- Page 29: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Diffusion models
• The diffusion model is a model of the cognitive processes involved in 
simple two-choice decisions.
• The model should be applied only to relatively fast low-choice 
decisions (mean RTs less than about 1000 to 1500 ms) and only to 
decisions that are a single-stage decision process.
• Diffusion models (Ratcliff, 1978) 
explain this simple, two-choice 
decision making process.

---

<!-- Page 30: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Diffusion models
• The diffusion model assumes that 
decisions are made by a noisy 
process that accumulates 
information over time from a 
starting point toward one of two 
response criteria or boundaries.
• The starting point is labeled z and the 
boundaries are labeled a and 0. 
• When one of the boundaries is 
reached, a response is initiated. The 
rate of accumulation of information is 
called the drift rate (v), and it is 
determined by the quality of the 
information extracted from the 
stimulus.

---

<!-- Page 31: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Diffusion model
MT, mediotemporal, (V5)
lateral intraparietal 
cortex (area LIP)
DECISION based on the 
difference between 
evidences
Inhibition of 
the alternative 
decision
Activation of motor neurons in the 
FEF (frontal eye field, area 8)
6 vs 4
very low-level decision
Higher level decision
real area that produce teh decision process

---

<!-- Page 32: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Examples of these models in 2 situations that 
differ for the amount of evidences
• The diffusion model reacts adaptively to the levels of 
evidences of the alternative:
• Short decision making reaction time if the alternatives are 
different
• Long decision making reaction time if the alternatives are 
similar
• This “plasticity” is a characteristic of the diffusion 
model.
• Neurons use the diffusion model.
Diffusion

---

<!-- Page 33: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual decision making in the brain
• When monkeys must decide whether a noisy field of dots is moving 
upward or downward, a decision can be formed by computing the 
difference in responses between lower-level neurons sensitive to 
upward motion and those sensitive to downward motion
• Is there a similar mechanism at work for more complex decisions in 
the human brain?

---

<!-- Page 34: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual decision 
making in the brain
• We can apply the diffusion model 
to human decision making 
processes.
• Findings from single-cell recording 
studies suggest that a comparison 
of the outputs of different pools 
of sensory neurons may be a 
general mechanism by which 
higher-level brain regions 
compute perceptual decisions.
• Task: subjects decide whether an 
image presented is a face or a 
house
• To test the model of decision-making, the 
authors added noise to the face and house 
stimuli, which made the task arbitrarily 
more difficult by reducing the sensory 
evidence available to the subject

---

<!-- Page 35: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual decision 
making in the brain
Subjects viewed images that were either easy
(suprathreshold, Fig. 1b top) or difficult 
(perithreshold, Fig. 1b bottom) to identify as 
faces or houses
30 noise
50 noise
70 noise

---

<!-- Page 36: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual decision 
making in the brain
EFFECT of TASK DIFFICULTY:
Orange easier (low noise proportion)
•
PCC →posterior cinculate cortex
•
SFS →superior frontal gyrus
Blu harder (high noise proportion)
•
FEF →frontal eye field
•
SEF →supplementary eye field
•
IPS →intraparietal sulcus

---

<!-- Page 37: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual decision 
making in the brain
If the activity of the house detector is larger than the activity in the face detectors →we decide that we see houses.  
If the activity of the face detectors is larger than the activity of the house detectors →we decide that we see faces
Authors identified voxels in the ventral temporal cortex that 
responded more to faces than to houses, and vice versa, in 
each subject (Fig. 2a, ‘Face’ and ‘House’).

---

<!-- Page 38: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual decision 
making in the brain
DLPFC as “computational” unit
Activity in DLPFC is 
proportional to the  
difference in the 
activity of the face 
and the house 
detectors

---

<!-- Page 39: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

• DLPFC performs the computation that provides this decision.
• This region fulfilled the two conditions implicit in the Shadlen model 
of perceptual decision-making:
1.
First, the region showed greater activity during those trials in which more
sensory evidence for one of the alternative categories was available 
(suprathreshold versus perithreshold stimuli). 
2.
Second, the activity in this region was correlated with the absolute 
difference between the signals of face- and house-selective regions. 
3.
Finally, signal changes in this region predicted task performance
Perceptual decision 
making in the brain

---

<!-- Page 40: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual decision making in the brain
• Perceptual decisions are based on an 
integrative process in which sensory 
evidence accumulates over time until 
an internal decision bound is 
reached.
• The authors used repetitive 
transcranial magnetic stimulation 
(rTMS) to provide causal support for 
the role of the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) in this 
integrative process
Task: perceptual categorization task 
(presented noisy pictures of faces and cars and 
subjects had to decide)

---

<!-- Page 41: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

Perceptual decision making in the brain
rTMS
suppression 
of DLPFC

---

<!-- Page 42: 2_1xn2.Fqv7c8lyq6Fk.file.pdf -->

•
Disruption of the left DLPFC with low frequency rTMS
reduced accuracy and increased response times relative to a 
sham condition.
•
These results provide causal evidence linking the DLPFC to 
the mechanism of evidence accumulation during perceptual 
decision making.
Perceptual decision making in the brain